Add support for bootstrapping with an existing etcd cluster (#1364)
gardener/etcd-druid: docs/concepts/bootstrap-with-existing-cluster.md

# Bootstrap with an Existing etcd Cluster

> `etcd-druid` can create a new `Etcd` resource by joining it to an already-running etcd cluster instead of forming a standalone cluster. The new etcd-druid managed members become part of the existing etcd cluster and replicate its data while the existing members continue serving traffic.

Reviewer: > `etcd-druid` can create a new `Etcd` resource

I think this need to be re-worded as etcd-druid can't create a `Etcd` resource, the `Etcd` resource must have to deployed by user.

        # one entry per source member to include in the initial cluster view
      clientEndpoints:
        - <source-client-endpoint-reachable-from-target>
```

The values must match the source cluster's member/client endpoints as seen by the target network.

### Status

After the join succeeds, `etcd-druid` writes a snapshot of the source-cluster members that were part of the combined cluster:

```yaml
status:
  bootstrapWithExistingClusterMembers:
    - name: <source-member-name>
      peerUrls:
        - <source-peer-url-recorded-from-spec>
      joinedAt: "2026-06-04T10:11:00Z"
```

This list records source members that were present when the target successfully bootstrapped with the existing cluster. It does not describe target members.

`joinedAt` is a shared bootstrap-completion timestamp. It is not a per-member join timestamp; all entries written in the same bootstrap completion have the same value.

### Condition

`BootstrappedWithExistingCluster` reports the join state:

| State | Condition | Meaning |
|-------|-----------|---------|
| Not in use | absent | `bootstrapWithExistingCluster` is not configured and no bootstrap status exists. |

> | In progress | `False / BootstrapInProgress` | The target has not yet fully joined, or not all target members are ready. |

Reviewer 2: Imo there needs to be 4 states in total, in addition to the 3 existing ones, having a `Failed` state incase of incorrectly providing the bootstrap config or due to other issues, then the `Failed` state can be reflected.

Right now, if there's an incorrect config, the condition state will be in `In Progress` which is not meaningful for the cluster operators, it should be clearly specifying that the Etcd CR creation has failed due to certain issues.

Author: Discussed offline — we both agree a Failed state isn't feasible here. To flip to Failed we need a reliable, actionable failure signal, and today the target has no way to distinguish a broken join from a slow one or a transient network hiccup.

## What etcd-druid changes during the join

When `bootstrapWithExistingCluster` is configured, etcd-druid changes only the target `Etcd` resource it manages:

1. **ConfigMap `initial-cluster`:** source members from `.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster.members` are appended to the target's `initial-cluster` configuration together with target members.
2. **StatefulSet `--service-endpoints`:** source `clientEndpoints` are appended so the target sidecar can observe the combined cluster.
3. **Status:** once the join succeeds, `.status.bootstrapWithExistingClusterMembers` is written as the source-member snapshot.

etcd-druid does not modify an externally managed source cluster. For such sources, reachable advertised peer URLs and TLS trust must be prepared by the source operator before creating the target `Etcd` resource.

## Validation and mutability

Admission validation catches common authoring errors:

| Field | Constraint |
|-------|------------|
| `.members` | required; at most 10 entries |
| `.members[*].name` | required; RFC 1123 label; must match the source member name |

> | `.members[*].peerUrls` | required; at most 5 URLs per member; URL scheme must match `.spec.etcd.peerUrlTls` |

Reviewer 2: For these also all of them have a minimum constraint of 1 entry along with the mentioned maximum constraint right? rn only the maximum constraint is listed here.

> | `.clientEndpoints` | required; at most 10 entries; URL scheme must match `.spec.etcd.clientUrlTls` |

Reviewer 2: another constraint for the `clientEndpoints` is to have minimum 1 entry, correct?

# Bootstrap with an Existing etcd Cluster

`etcd-druid` can bootstrap a new `Etcd` resource by joining it to an already-running etcd cluster instead of creating a standalone cluster.

This capability enables two common workflows:

> - **Migration** — Move etcd state from one cluster to another by adding new members that synchronize automatically. Removal of the original source members is tracked separately in [DEP-08](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1355).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Migration** — Move etcd state from one cluster to another by adding new members that synchronize automatically. Removal of the original source members is tracked separately in [DEP-08](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1369).
```
since the older PR was closed infavor of the new one.

- **Extension** — Add new etcd-druid managed members to an existing cluster while keeping the original members in service.

In both cases, the source cluster continues serving reads and writes throughout the operation.

> [!NOTE]
> Source-member removal is **not yet implemented**. Clearing `.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster` is allowed (see [Mutability](#mutability)) but currently has no effect on the cluster.

## Terminology

| Term | Definition |
|------|------------|

> | **Source etcd cluster** | The existing cluster whose data is being joined. The source may be managed by etcd-druid, self-managed, or hosted outside Kubernetes. |

Reviewer 2: > The source may be managed by etcd-druid, self-managed, or hosted outside Kubernetes.

This doc & the changes we're making in this PR + the additionalAdvertisePeerURLs only support the clusters managed by etcd-druid correct? I just wanted to know if we're providing a way to configure the `--initial-advertise-peer-urls` manually in the case of a non-druid managed cluster? If not, then should we mention the terms such as `self-managed` or `hosted outside kubernetes` in this doc?

Author: This feature is not limited to etcd-druid managed source clusters.

So for a non-druid managed source cluster, the responsibility is on the user/operator to provide peer URLs that are already advertised by the source cluster and reachable from the target network. If the source currently advertises internal/private peer URLs that the target cannot reach, then the source cluster has to be prepared manually first, e.g. by exposing/updating reachable peer URLs on the source side. That part is outside etcd-druid's control.

`additionalAdvertisePeerURLs` is only a convenience for etcd-druid managed source clusters to publish additional reachable peer URLs. 

This is also why the usage doc calls this out as a prerequisite:
`Every source member's peer URL must be dialable from the target's network namespace...`

- non-druid/self-managed source: user must ensure the configured source peer URLs are advertised by the source and reachable from the target.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for improving the docs and mentioning that explicitly.

```text
┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│         Combined etcd cluster — join phase complete                            │
│         (6 voting members; quorum = 4)                                         │
│                                                                                │
│   ┌─────────────┐    ┌─────────────┐    ┌─────────────┐                        │
│   │etcd-source-0│    │etcd-source-1│    │etcd-source-2│   source members       │
│   │   leader    │◄──►│   follower  │◄──►│   follower  │                        │
│   └─────────────┘    └─────────────┘    └─────────────┘                        │
│                                                                                │
│   ┌─────────────┐    ┌─────────────┐    ┌─────────────┐                        │
│   │etcd-target-0│    │etcd-target-1│    │etcd-target-2│   target members       │
│   │   follower  │◄──►│   follower  │◄──►│   follower  │                        │
│   └─────────────┘    └─────────────┘    └─────────────┘                        │
└────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

> After the source-member removal proposed in [DEP-08](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1355) completes, only the target remains: a 3-member etcd cluster with quorum 2.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the source-member removal proposed in [DEP-08](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1369) completes, only the target remains: a 3-member etcd cluster with quorum 2.
```

## API Surface

### Spec

```yaml
spec:
  etcd:
    bootstrapWithExistingCluster:
      members:
        - name: etcd-source-0
          peerUrls:
            - https://etcd-source-0.etcd-source-peer.source-ns.svc:2380

>         # ... one entry per source member

Reviewer 2: does it have to be strictly one member? what if the advertise URL we've configured for a particular source member isn't resolved correct and we may want to fall back to a different url? from what I know from your previous PR https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1315 which provides a way to configure multiple advertise urls for each member, correct? then what is the usecase of that if those multiple urls cannot be added here as a fall back mechanism incase of failures in address resolution, etc? Just trying to understand better.

Author: The API does allow multiple peer URLs per member: Members[].PeerURLs is []string with MinItems=1, MaxItems=5 (same limits as additionalAdvertisePeerURLs). My wording made it sound like one URL per member entry, not one URL per peerURLs field.

I'll update the doc to show a multi-URL example.

      clientEndpoints:
        - https://etcd-source-client.source-ns.svc:2379
```

For a complete `Etcd` manifest, see the [usage guide](../usage/bootstrapping-with-existing-cluster.md#step-by-step-setup).

### Status

```yaml
status:
  bootstrapWithExistingClusterMembers:
    - name: etcd-source-0
      peerUrls:
        - https://etcd-source-0.etcd-source-peer.source-ns.svc:2380
      joinedAt: "2026-06-04T10:11:00Z"

>     # ... one entry per source member, all sharing the same joinedAt

Reviewer 2: To me the status currently reads like this: that the field `bootstrapWithExistingClusterMembers` contains information about all the members that were configured to be added using the `.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster` field... But here it seems like we're only recording the status of those members that have successfully joined, but what about the others which are in progress or the ones that failed to join because of configuration issues like incorrect peer address or even if address is right but due to address resolution issues with DNS or other networking issues? should we capture those also? in that case how does the status api change for that?

Or if you want to record only the status of members that have successfully joined, I think the field name `bootstrapWithExistingClusterMembers` should be improved to reflect that.

Author: The status records configured source members only after the target has joined them — i.e. after the condition transitions to True see [reconcile_status.go:104-127](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/85251b04/internal/controller/etcd/reconcile_status.go#L104-L127). Reaching that point means the target etcd member(s) successfully dialed at least one peer URL per source member and joined quorum, which implicitly confirms every recorded source member was reachable.

I'll add a one-line note in the concept doc spelling this out explicitly so the semantics aren't ambiguous from the API surface alone.

```

> `.status.bootstrapWithExistingClusterMembers` is a flat `[]BootstrapJoinedMember` list on `EtcdStatus`. Each entry records a source member the target joined to. `joinedAt` records when the target finished bootstrapping; bootstrap is atomic, so the value is identical across all entries. The reconciler writes all entries in a single call and never updates them afterwards.

Reviewer 3: `Each entry records a source member the target joined to` - again, not very clear. Why would a target join a specific source member, but would rather the source cluster as a whole right? Am I missing something here?

Author: Updated wording

| `.clientEndpoints` | required; **at most 10** entries; each must be `https://` when `.spec.etcd.clientUrlTls` is set, `http://` otherwise |

> [!NOTE]
> The list-size caps (5 URLs per member, 10 members, 10 client endpoints) are imposed by Kubernetes' per-rule **CEL validation cost budget** — the URL-scheme rules iterate over every entry, so cost scales with list length. Raising the limits requires restructuring the CEL rules first.

URL-scheme mismatches are rejected at admission time. **Certificate-trust mismatches are detected only at runtime** — see [TLS Trust Model](#tls-trust-model).

#### Mutability

A CEL transition rule controls whether `.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster` can be set or cleared on an update:

```text
!has(self.bootstrapWithExistingCluster) || has(oldSelf.bootstrapWithExistingCluster)
```

| # | Old has field? | New has field? | Allowed? | Meaning |
|---|----------------|----------------|----------|---------|
| 1 | no | no | Yes | Non-bootstrap clusters stay non-bootstrap |
| 2 | yes | yes | Yes | Edits to `members`/`clientEndpoints` after creation |
| 3 | no | yes | **No** | Cannot retrofit the feature onto an existing `Etcd` |

> | 4 | yes | no | Yes | Clears the spec (no effect today; see [DEP-08](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1355) for planned removal behavior) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| 4 | yes | no | Yes | Clears the spec (no effect today; see [DEP-08](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1369) for planned removal behavior) |
```

> [!NOTE]

> > Edits to `members` / `clientEndpoints` (row 2) are allowed by the API but should generally be avoided once the join is in progress. After the condition flips to `True/BootstrappedWithExistingCluster`, the spec is no longer consulted for the join — `.status.bootstrapWithExistingClusterMembers` is the source of truth at that point. Edits remain allowed primarily to support correcting typos before any target pod has come up.

Reviewer 2: Can you expand a bit on this as it's unclear for me? from what is described, the edits to members/clientEndpoints are not considered once the join phase is completed, then the only time we still want to allow edits is so that if they want to change something during the join is in progress, right? but the line > should generally be avoided once the join is in progress. is confusing for me atleast... do you mean that the edits should only be done before the druid controller picks up the changes to be reconciled? i.e if the operator has added a disable reconciliation annotation so druid isn't picking up the changes for reconciliation, is that the only time when you want to suggest making changes and once the reconciliation is resumed, it's advised not to make the changes? Just wanted to understand the cases better here.

> > Edits to `members` / `clientEndpoints` (row 2) are allowed by the API but should generally be avoided once the join is in progress. After the condition flips to `True/BootstrappedWithExistingCluster`, the spec is no longer consulted for the join — `.status.bootstrapWithExistingClusterMembers` is the source of truth at that point. Edits remain allowed primarily to support correcting typos before any target pod has come up.

Reviewer 3: `but should generally be avoided once the join is in progress` - why can't this be enforced in the validation itself, instead of leaving it to the end-user's choice?

Author: Note block is removed.

The proper enforcement is coming via DEP-08 (https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1369), which introduces a [ScaleOperationInProgress condition](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1369/files#diff-d640795f8b456f4cf3c545625a401ece0ce3520d40127f6235e2341ff6e6bf43R99-R112) that the controller sets while a scale-in or scale-out (which includes the bootstrap join) is in flight and clears on completion. A CEL transition rule keyed on that condition will reject edits to bootstrapWithExistingCluster.members / clientEndpoints while the join is in progress — so it stops being "user discretion" and becomes API-enforced.

Reviewer 3: But that's related to scale-in and not bootstrap operation. `BootstrappedWithExistingCluster` condition can and should be used for this validation IMO. This feature of bootstrapping with existing cluster is a feature by itself, and its validation should not depend on a future feature's validation.

## How etcd-druid Implements the Join

> When `.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster` is configured, `etcd-druid` modifies three runtime artifacts:

Reviewer 2: > When `.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster` is configured, `etcd-druid` modifies three runtime artifacts:

the word `modifies` here reads like we're making changes to an existing cluster, but the most common usecase is when we're bootstrapping a fresh target cluster to be joined with the source cluster right? then we won't be modifying but creating them for the first time. 🤔

### 1. ConfigMap (`initial-cluster`)

> The target cluster's `initial-cluster` configuration is extended with entries for every source member.

Reviewer 2: Similar to the comment above, the word `extended` here reads like we're making changes to the `.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster` spec field mid way instead of creating a fresh Etcd CR. Maybe the wording here can be improved. Wdyt?

The two TLS contexts (peer and client) are independent — each is configured by its own `TLSConfig` and can be set in any combination. The trust roots for each context must include the source cluster's corresponding CA before the join can succeed; bidirectional trust is required because the source must also accept incoming TLS connections from target members.

> [!WARNING]
> A URL-scheme mismatch is rejected at admission time. A certificate-trust mismatch is detected only at runtime: the target etcd fails its TLS handshake against the source, and the `BootstrappedWithExistingCluster` condition stays at `False/BootstrapInProgress` until the trust roots are corrected.

## Related

- [Bootstrapping with an Existing etcd Cluster (usage guide)](../usage/bootstrapping-with-existing-cluster.md) — operator-facing setup steps and verification.
- [Using Additional Advertise Peer URLs](../usage/using-additional-advertise-peer-urls.md) — frequently paired when source and target run in different network domains.
- [etcd Cluster Components](etcd-cluster-components.md) — resources `etcd-druid` manages for every `Etcd` resource.

> - [DEP-08](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1355) — design proposal for the source-member removal reconciliation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [DEP-08](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1369) — design proposal for the source-member removal reconciliation.
```

# Bootstrap with an Existing etcd Cluster

`etcd-druid` can bootstrap a new `Etcd` resource by joining it to an already-running etcd cluster instead of creating a standalone cluster.

This capability enables two common workflows:

> - **Migration** — Move etcd state from one cluster to another by adding new members that synchronize automatically. Removal of the original source members is tracked separately in [DEP #1355](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1355).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Migration** — Move etcd state from one cluster to another by adding new members that synchronize automatically. Removal of the original source members is tracked separately in [DEP-08](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1355).
```

- **Extension** — Add new etcd-druid managed members to an existing cluster while keeping the original members in service.

In both cases, the source cluster continues serving reads and writes throughout the operation.

> The feature currently covers only the **join phase**: adding target members to an existing etcd cluster. Automated removal of the original source members is proposed in [DEP #1355](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1355) and will build on the status and trigger semantics described in this document.

Reviewer 3: This sentence seems repetitive after the previous `Migration` bullet point already talks about it. Please consolidate them and remove this.

> [!NOTE]

> > Source-member removal is **not yet implemented**. Clearing `.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster` currently only arms the future removal trigger.

Reviewer 3: Seems like this very much depends on how DEP-08 is designed/implemented, so can we make such claims until that DEP is merged?

## Terminology

| Term | Definition |
|------|------------|
| **Source etcd cluster** | The existing cluster whose data is being joined. The source may be managed by etcd-druid, self-managed, or hosted outside Kubernetes. |
| **Target etcd cluster** | The new etcd-druid managed cluster that joins the source. |

> | **Combined etcd cluster** | The state in which source and target members form a single etcd cluster. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| **Combined etcd cluster** | The single cluster that is formed by members of both the source and target etcd clusters. |
```

| **Learner** | A non-voting etcd member that receives Raft log entries but does not participate in quorum decisions. Target members are added as learners before being promoted to voting members. |

> | **Join phase** | The bootstrap lifecycle during which target members join the source cluster and are recorded in `.status.bootstrapWithExistingClusterMembers`. |

Reviewer 3: Since we are only talking about terminologies here, I don't think we should be talking about the code/API changes like where the members are recorded in the `Etcd.status` right here. You describe those later in the doc anyway, so can you simplify this please?

```text
┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│         Combined etcd cluster — join phase complete                            │
│         (6 voting members; quorum = 4)                                         │
│                                                                                │
│   ┌─────────────┐    ┌─────────────┐    ┌─────────────┐                        │
│   │etcd-source-0│    │etcd-source-1│    │etcd-source-2│   source members       │
│   │   leader    │◄──►│   follower  │◄──►│   follower  │                        │
│   └─────────────┘    └─────────────┘    └─────────────┘                        │
│          ▲                  ▲                  ▲                               │
│          │                  │                  │                               │

> │          ▼                  ▼                  ▼                               │

Reviewer 3: What is the need of these vertical arrows? Does it indicate something like each corresponding source and target member talk to each directly? This is unclear.

│   ┌─────────────┐    ┌─────────────┐    ┌─────────────┐                        │
│   │etcd-target-0│    │etcd-target-1│    │etcd-target-2│   target members       │
│   │   follower  │◄──►│   follower  │◄──►│   follower  │                        │
│   └─────────────┘    └─────────────┘    └─────────────┘                        │
└────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

> After the source-member removal proposed in DEP #1355 completes, only the target remains: a 3-member etcd cluster with quorum 2, with `.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster` cleared and `.status.bootstrapWithExistingClusterMembers` cleared by the removal reconciliation.

Reviewer 3: Can you please refer to it as DEP-08 rather than the PR number (here and in other places too)? 

Since this doc refers to functionality that is _proposed_ by a DEP and not yet implemented, I would prefer if you create a follow-up issue to update this doc after DEP-08 implementation, to avoid this doc becoming stale. At that point, you can include actual implementation details instead of being cryptic about a proposed DEP.

## API Surface

### Spec

```yaml
spec:
  etcd:
    bootstrapWithExistingCluster:
      members:
        - name: etcd-source-0
          peerUrls:
            - https://etcd-source-0.etcd-source-peer.source-ns.svc:2380
        - name: etcd-source-1
          peerUrls:
            - https://etcd-source-1.etcd-source-peer.source-ns.svc:2380
        - name: etcd-source-2
          peerUrls:
            - https://etcd-source-2.etcd-source-peer.source-ns.svc:2380
      clientEndpoints:
        - https://etcd-source-client.source-ns.svc:2379
```

### Status

```yaml
status:
  bootstrapWithExistingClusterMembers:
    - name: etcd-source-0
      peerUrls:
        - https://etcd-source-0.etcd-source-peer.source-ns.svc:2380
      joinedAt: "2026-06-04T10:11:00Z"
    - name: etcd-source-1
      peerUrls:
        - https://etcd-source-1.etcd-source-peer.source-ns.svc:2380
      joinedAt: "2026-06-04T10:11:00Z"
    - name: etcd-source-2
      peerUrls:
        - https://etcd-source-2.etcd-source-peer.source-ns.svc:2380
      joinedAt: "2026-06-04T10:11:00Z"
```

> `.status.bootstrapWithExistingClusterMembers` is a flat `[]BootstrapJoinedMember` list on `EtcdStatus`. The status reconciler writes all entries in a single call with one shared timestamp; `joinedAt` is set once and never updated, giving operators a single record of when the target finished its join phase against the source.

Reviewer 3: This sentence is not very clear to me:
```
giving operators a single record of when the target finished its join phase against the source
```

The API talks about existing members, ie, source members' info, with their `joinedAt` fields, but you say this is the single record of when the target finished its join phase. This confuses me - what exactly does `joinedAt` denote? Joining of source members or target? If target, then the API change needs improvement.

### Condition

> The `BootstrapWithExistingCluster` condition type is added to `.status.conditions` when the feature is in use. It tracks whether the join has completed successfully. See [Lifecycle States](#lifecycle-states) for the full state machine.

Reviewer 3: A condition is always named in a way that denotes whether something happened or didn't happen or something is in a particular state. Like `AllMembersReady`, `DataVolumesReady`, etc. So this condition should be `BootstrappedWithExistingCluster` - the past tense is important here to denote that this particular thing _happened_, hence denoting that the Etcd cluster is in a state where the bootstrap happened.

### Validation

The validations below are enforced at admission time — partly by kubebuilder validation markers (required, list-size, regex), partly by CEL rules (URL-scheme coupling, mutability). Together they prevent the most common authoring mistakes.

| Field | Constraint |
|-------|------------|
| `.members` | required; **at most 10** entries |
| `.members[*].name` | required; RFC 1123 label (pattern `^[a-z0-9]([-a-z0-9]*[a-z0-9])?$`, max 253 chars) — must match a real source member name |
| `.members[*].peerUrls` | required; **at most 5** URLs per member; each must be `https://` when `.spec.etcd.peerUrlTls` is set, `http://` otherwise |

> | `.clientEndpoints` | required; **at most 10** entries; each must be `https://` when `.spec.etcd.clientUrlTls` is set, `http://` otherwise |

Reviewer 3: `spec.etcd.clientUrlTls` decides the client TLS for the target members, while `.clientEndpoints` talks about the TLS for the client endpoint for source members. So technically it's possible that one is TLS-enabled while the other is not TLS-enabled, right?

> [!NOTE]
> The list-size caps (5 URLs per member, 10 members, 10 client endpoints) are imposed by Kubernetes' per-rule **CEL validation cost budget** — the URL-scheme rules iterate over every entry, so cost scales with list length. Raising the limits requires restructuring the CEL rules first.

URL-scheme mismatches are rejected at admission time. **Certificate-trust mismatches are detected only at runtime** — see [TLS Requirements](#tls-requirements).

#### Mutability

A CEL transition rule controls whether `.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster` can be set or cleared on an update:

```text
!has(self.bootstrapWithExistingCluster) || has(oldSelf.bootstrapWithExistingCluster)
```

| # | Old has field? | New has field? | Allowed? | Meaning |
|---|----------------|----------------|----------|---------|
| 1 | no | no | Yes | Non-bootstrap clusters stay non-bootstrap |

> | 2 | yes | yes | Yes | Edits to `members`/`clientEndpoints` after creation |

Reviewer 3: Do we really allow edits to the section after it's already defined? Isn't that dangerous, if the cluster is currently in the join phase and you change the source config midway?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, seems dangerous to me too. I've added a comment on the note below where it suggests that the changes are not to be while the join is in progress but there's no deterministic or the right way to differentiate the join is in progress or not and the operators do not have the control to pause/resume it apart from stopping the druid reconciliation with annotation... so now the only time the changes are supposed to be made is when the reconciler is disabled? but that is not enforced at the moment and it's left to the user's discretion to do that, which feels a bit risky to me. Is my understanding right?

Author: The proper enforcement is coming via DEP-08 (https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1369), which introduces a [`ScaleOperationInProgress` condition](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1369/files#diff-d640795f8b456f4cf3c545625a401ece0ce3520d40127f6235e2341ff6e6bf43R99-R112) that the controller sets while a scale-in or scale-out (which includes the bootstrap join) is in flight and clears on completion. A CEL transition rule keyed on that condition will reject edits to bootstrapWithExistingCluster.members / clientEndpoints while the join is in progress — so it stops being "user discretion" and becomes API-enforced.

| 3 | no | yes | **No** | Cannot retrofit the feature onto an existing `Etcd` |

> | 4 | yes | no | Yes | Clears the spec — arms the removal trigger |

Reviewer 3: Again, brings semantics of DEP-08 which hasn't been implemented yet, so this doc cannot claim things like `arms the removal trigger` until that's implemented or atleast DEP is merged.

> [!WARNING]
> The API server rejects retrofit attempts (row 3) with the message:

> > *"etcd.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster cannot be added after the Etcd resource has been created"*

Reviewer 3: I think this is unnecessary information, since the error is self-explanatory when the user actually faces this error if they try to add the section on an existing Etcd cluster.

## How etcd-druid Implements the Join

When `.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster` is configured, `etcd-druid` modifies three runtime artifacts:

### 1. ConfigMap (`initial-cluster`)

The target cluster's `initial-cluster` configuration is extended with entries for every source member.

The resulting configuration contains, in order:

1. All target member peer URLs (including any `additionalAdvertisePeerURLs`).
2. All source member peer URLs.

This allows target pods to discover the source cluster during startup.

### 2. StatefulSet (`--service-endpoints`)

The `etcd-backup-restore` sidecar is configured with the source cluster's client endpoints by appending `.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster.clientEndpoints` to `--service-endpoints`.

### 3. Status Reconciliation

After all target members become Ready, the `BootstrapWithExistingCluster` condition transitions to `True` with reason `BootstrapSucceeded`.

> During the same reconciliation pass, `etcd-druid` records the source-member inventory in `.status.bootstrapWithExistingClusterMembers`, assigning a shared `joinedAt` timestamp to every entry.

Reviewer 3: To me, the `joinedAt` semantics are not very clear, atleast from the doc.

Reviewer 2: not sure whether this was discussed offline and was hence closed, but I have the same doubt now, does the joinedAt records the time when the last member has joined successfully and hence all members will have this same timestamp? or is it recorded per member? if the latter then where is this information being recorded?

This snapshot is written only once:

- Existing entries are never overwritten.
- `joinedAt` is never modified.

> - Missing `peerUrls` may be backfilled during later reconciliations for compatibility with older API versions.

Reviewer 3: Can you please explain this? I didn't get the reasoning for this, ie, the `compatibility with older API versions` part.

## TLS Requirements

URL-scheme rules are enforced at admission time and documented under [Validation](#validation). This section covers the runtime CA-trust workflow that the operator must set up *outside* of API admission.

There is no separate source-CA reference field on `bootstrapWithExistingCluster`. At runtime, the target etcd and backup-restore processes dial source endpoints using the target's own TLS trust roots:

- Target etcd dials source peer URLs over TLS using `.spec.etcd.peerUrlTls` trust roots.
- Target `etcd-backup-restore` dials source client endpoints using `.spec.etcd.clientUrlTls` trust roots.

When TLS is enabled, the operator must:

1. **Copy the source cluster's CA certificate** to the target cluster.
2. **Create a combined CA bundle** containing both the target CA and the source CA. Store this bundle in the `Secret`s referenced by `.spec.etcd.peerUrlTls.tlsCASecretRef` and `.spec.etcd.clientUrlTls.tlsCASecretRef`.

> 3. **Sign the target's TLS certificates** using a CA the source also trusts. The source etcd members must accept incoming TLS connections from target members during the join phase.

Reviewer 3: Please specify which CA you refer to here - peer CA or server/client CA, or both.

If both clusters already share a common CA, no merging is needed — the shared CA handles trust in both directions.

> [!WARNING]

> > A URL-scheme mismatch is rejected at admission time. A certificate-trust mismatch is detected only at runtime: the target etcd exits with `tls: failed to verify certificate: x509: certificate is not trusted` and the `BootstrapWithExistingCluster` condition stays at `False/BootstrapInProgress`.

Reviewer 3: `certificate is not trusted` seems like the incorrect error message, since it implies that the scheme is fine but the actual cert if untrusted, and that can be very misleading. The error should be accurate here, so that there's no need to even document it and it becomes self-explanatory.

# Bootstrap with an Existing etcd Cluster

> `etcd-druid` can bootstrap a new `Etcd` resource by joining it to an already-running etcd cluster instead of creating a standalone cluster. It uses etcd's native [learner](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.5/learning/design-learner/) mechanism to add new members, synchronize data, and promote them to voting members once they are fully caught up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`etcd-druid` can bootstrap a new `Etcd` resource by joining it to an already-running etcd cluster instead of creating a standalone cluster. 
```
I think it's a implementation details which is done by backup-restore not by druid, we can remove it imo.

This capability enables two common workflows:

> - **Migration** — Move etcd state from one cluster to another without restoring snapshots or copying data. New members join the existing cluster, synchronize automatically, and eventually replace the original members.

Reviewer: as currently this feature isn't supporting "replacement of original members" as it's a separate feature, shall we mention this or can you reword it may be ? wdyt

> - **Extension** — Add new etcd-druid managed members to an existing cluster while keeping the original members in service.

Reviewer: Can old member are not necessarily managed by druid ? Let say a independent etcd cluster, will new members (managed by druid) can still joins ?

Author: Yes — the source can be self-managed or managed outside Kubernetes; only the target must be a druid-managed Etcd.

In both cases, the source cluster continues serving reads and writes throughout the operation.

> The feature currently covers only the **join phase**: adding target members as learners, synchronizing data, and promoting them to voting members. Automated removal of the original source members is proposed in [DEP #1355](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1355) and will build on the status and trigger semantics described in this document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The feature currently covers only the **join phase**: adding target members to a existing etcd cluster. Automated removal of the original source members is proposed in [DEP #1355](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/1355) and will build on the status and trigger semantics described in this document.
```
reason same as above, I don't think there is need to mention how members are being added via backup-restore and all.

> [!NOTE]
> Source-member removal is **not yet implemented**. Clearing `.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster` currently only arms the future removal trigger.

## Terminology

| Term | Definition |
|------|------------|
| **Source etcd cluster** | The existing cluster whose data is being joined. The source may be managed by etcd-druid, self-managed, or hosted outside Kubernetes. |
| **Target etcd cluster** | The new etcd-druid managed cluster that joins the source. Its members are added as learners, synchronize data, and are promoted to voting members. |
| **Combined etcd cluster** | The temporary state in which source and target members form a single etcd cluster. During this period, learners do not contribute to quorum until promoted. |

> | **Learner** | A non-voting etcd member that receives Raft log entries but does not participate in quorum decisions. Target members are added as learners before promotion. Because etcd allows only **one learner at a time**, target members join sequentially. |

Reviewer: same as above

| **Join phase** | The bootstrap lifecycle during which target members are added as learners, promoted to voting members, and recorded in status. |

> | **Removal phase** | The future reconciliation proposed in DEP #1355 that removes source members after migration is complete. |

Reviewer: `Removal phase` isn't relevant for this doc, Isn't it should be removed ?

│   ┌─────────────┐    ┌─────────────┐    ┌─────────────┐                        │
│   │etcd-source-0│    │etcd-source-1│    │etcd-source-2│   voting members       │
│   │   leader    │◄──►│  follower   │◄──►│  follower   │   (quorum = 2)         │
│   └──────┬──────┘    └─────────────┘    └─────────────┘                        │
│          │                                                                     │
│          │  leader streams Raft log to the current learner                     │
│          ▼                                                                     │
│   ┌─────────────┐    ┌─────────────┐    ┌─────────────┐                        │
│   │etcd-target-0│    │etcd-target-1│    │etcd-target-2│                        │
│   │   learner   │    │   pending   │    │   pending   │                        │
│   │ catching up │    │ (MemberAdd  │    │ (MemberAdd  │                        │
│   │             │    │  blocks     │    │  blocks     │                        │
│   │             │    │  until      │    │  until      │                        │
│   │             │    │  target-0   │    │  target-1   │                        │

> │   │             │    │  promoted)  │    │  promoted)  │                        │

Reviewer: let's not go into details of who get promoted first and all as there is no syncronization, so we can't say who joins first, imo just a simple diagram with relevant information would be suffice

│   └─────────────┘    └─────────────┘    └─────────────┘                        │
└────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

The diagram is a snapshot mid-sequence. Once `etcd-target-0` is promoted, `etcd-target-1` is added as the next learner; once it is promoted, `etcd-target-2` follows. After the source-member removal proposed in DEP #1355 completes, only the target remains: a 3-member etcd cluster with quorum 2, with `.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster` cleared and `.status.bootstrapWithExistingClusterMembers` cleared by the removal reconciliation.

> ## How etcd-druid Implements the Join

Reviewer: I think this should come first before the example which you have mentioned above , wdyt ?

When `.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster` is configured, `etcd-druid` modifies three runtime artifacts:

### 1. ConfigMap (`initial-cluster`)

The target cluster's `initial-cluster` configuration is extended with entries for every source member.

The resulting configuration contains, in order:

1. All target member peer URLs (including any `additionalAdvertisePeerURLs`).
2. All source member peer URLs.

This allows target pods to discover the source cluster during startup. Each target pod attempts to join using `MemberAdd(learner=true)`. Because only one learner is allowed at a time, subsequent pods wait until the previous learner has been promoted.

### 2. StatefulSet (`--service-endpoints`)

The `etcd-backup-restore` sidecar is configured with the source cluster's client endpoints by appending `.spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster.clientEndpoints` to `--service-endpoints`.

This enables the sidecar to:

- Probe source-cluster health.
- Monitor learner synchronization progress.
- Promote learners using `MemberPromote` once they have caught up.

> - Coordinate the sequential learner workflow.

Reviewer: I think we shouldn't mention details about backup-restore in druid

- Missing `peerUrls` may be backfilled during later reconciliations for compatibility with older API versions.

### Code references

- [`prepareInitialCluster`](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/internal/component/configmap/etcdconfig.go) in `internal/component/configmap/etcdconfig.go` — extends `initial-cluster` with source members.
- [StatefulSet builder](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/internal/component/statefulset/builder.go) in `internal/component/statefulset/builder.go` — appends source client endpoints to the backup-restore sidecar's `--service-endpoints`.
- [`check_bootstrap_with_existing_cluster.go`](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/internal/health/condition/check_bootstrap_with_existing_cluster.go) — implements the `BootstrapWithExistingCluster` condition check.
- [`mutateBootstrapWithExistingClusterStatus`](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/internal/controller/etcd/reconcile_status.go) in `internal/controller/etcd/reconcile_status.go` — populates `.status.bootstrapWithExistingClusterMembers` once the condition is `True` and back-fills empty `peerUrls` on later reconciles.

> ## API Surface

Reviewer: can we move the API heading above

### Spec

```yaml
spec:
  etcd:
    bootstrapWithExistingCluster:
      members:
        - name: etcd-source-0
          peerUrls:
            - https://etcd-source-0.etcd-source-peer.source-ns.svc:2380
        - name: etcd-source-1
          peerUrls:
            - https://etcd-source-1.etcd-source-peer.source-ns.svc:2380
        - name: etcd-source-2
          peerUrls:
            - https://etcd-source-2.etcd-source-peer.source-ns.svc:2380
      clientEndpoints:

>         - https://etcd-source-client.source-ns.svc:2379

Reviewer: can we define the some general memberName and peerUrls, instead of `etcd-source-0`

Author: I kept the `etcd-source-*` / `etcd-target-*` names deliberately because they map 1:1 to the source/target distinction used throughout the doc — the Topology section, the diagram, and the TLS Requirements section all reference the same names, so a reader can trace one worked example end-to-end.
 
 Do you have a naming convention in mind that you'd prefer?
